# Outlier-Detection-and-Predicting-the-Game-Outcome

Machine Learning (ML) is truly helpful techniques for prediction and classification. The main objective is to report current progress and experiments’ results from using various ML methods. In this project, we analyze the NBA (National Basketball Association) statistics data for predicting the game outcome and detecting outliers.  Firstly, some feature selection algorithms are implemented and their MSE values are calculated by ANN. NCA-C shows a better performance. Then, some classification algorithms are applied by using NCA-C. SVM shows a better performance whereas Naïve Bayes shows a worse performance. Then we classify the data using two hidden layer (2x2 and 64x64 neurons) pattern recognition network. tansig shows a better performance whereas hardlim shows a worse performance. Secondly, when it comes to outlier detection, our aim is finding the players which break apart from ordinary or standart ones. Our outlier dataset variables are greater than one so we focused on multivariate outliers. In order to find the most contributing features, we used Principle Component Analysis. It helped us extracting decreased dimensional set of features from the features appproximating between 17 to 21. Afterward we practices PyOD tolkit which is specifically designed for outlier detection.  We used 5 algorthms, Isolation Forest, Feature Bagging Detector, KNN, Cluster Based Local Outlier and Average KNN. More or less results of first 4 of them was similar but Average KNN performed worse than others.

Intro

   There are 12 datasets in NBA statistics data [1] and it is used ‘team.season.txt’ for predicting the outcome and ‘player_playoff_career.csv’ was used for outlier detection. At ‘team_season.txt’ each data point is the performance of each team in a season. There are 36 features and 684 information of teams. These data include from 1946 to 2004 seasons. It is used the data beginning from the 1979 season since there are losses and inconsistencies before 1979 seasons. This part is implemented with the MATLAB. On the other hand, at ‘player_playoff_career.csv’ there are 19 features 2055 information is available. Outstanding players were detected based on different features such as points, assists, rebounds etc. Python PyOD library, which provides access to different algorithms for detecting outliers, is made use of during the second part of the work.
   Various approaches for feature selections (SFS, Relieff, and NCA) would be applied along with ANN for team win ratio of per year prediction. For outlier detection, since principle component analysis is fast and flexible unsupervised method, it is used to reduce dimensionality in dataset.
Our report is constructed as follows: (2) report on related work that has been done in the past, (3) proposed methodologies for feature selection, classification and outlier detection model and results from our experiments with those methodologies, (4) conclusion.

Related Work

   There are many work dealing with the topic of predicting the results of sports and detecting the outlier. Bunker and Thabtah [2] proposed a novel SRP-CRISP-DM framework for classification problem. They focused on predicting team sports results. In this work, it is used ANN and match-related features. Miljkovic et al. [3] presented a system for predicting the results of NBA games. It is used Naïve Bayes and multivariate linear regression methods. It is achieved the accuracy was of 67% (a total of 778 games in season 2009/2010). Wang et al. [4] improved the existing method which is a spanning tree-inspired clustering based outlier detection technique. In this paper, they found a new global outlier factor and by using this, they proposed a new minimum spanning tree (MST)-inspired k-NN-based outlier detection method. It is used in both synthetic and real high dimensional data. Their experiment showed that their work was successfully implemented. 
